Retaining students in their higher education studies is a longstanding issue that has received increased attention in more recent times. The impetus for the concern is the large-scale changes that have occurred in higher education over the past few decades and resulted in increased diversity in the cultural and educational backgrounds of participating students. In earlier times when the student proﬁle was more homogenous, academic success and study completion were seen as the responsibility of the students themselves. Currently in the context of diverse student cohorts, higher education institutions are seen to share responsibility with students for their study persistence, academic success, and study completion. It is now appreciated that institutions need to provide educational processes and programs that are inclusive for all students. Inclusive approaches are premised on acknowledging the range of backgrounds and experiences of all students in processes and services such as institutional discourse, student services, and educational programs. Importantly, inclusive approaches mobilize the range of perspectives, experiences, and viewpoints of all students in the educational setting, laying the foundations for a rich educational experience and academic success.

Changes in Higher Education and Student Retention

The changes in the higher education system over the past decades have seen increased diversity in the educational and cultural backgrounds of participating students. Higher education has moved from an elite system catering for a small percentage of national populations to a massiﬁed and, in some countries, a universal system, with much larger percentages of national populations enrolling in higher education studies (Trow 1974). The outcome is that students from some backgrounds where there is limited or different societal and family experience of higher education may be less attuned initially to the academic value systems and processes that underpin academic success. These backgrounds include low-income or economic status groups, mature aged students, students who are ﬁrst in their families to attend higher education, people with disabilities, and people from minority groups and refugees (Heagney 2008). The intensiﬁcation of the internationalization of the higher education system over the last few decades has also contributed strongly to student diversity. As students, academic programs, and institutions cross national boundaries, students bring to their studies varying educational, cultural, and language backgrounds and possibly greater initial divergence between their and the institution’s expectations and academic values. The situation of students such as these can be compared with their classmates who have background experiences and expectations that are more aligned to the values of academia and who are consequently better positioned for academic success.

Another interrelated factor that has prompted the current focus on student retention and added to student diversity is that nations recognize the need for tertiary-educated populations to cope with the demands of the technologically driven knowledge society (Schendel and McCowan 2016; McCowan 2016). With the consequent increased demand for higher education, some nations, such as Malaysia, have opened up to private higher education for which students pay full fees, or, as occurs in countries such as Australia with largely public education system for local students, attending students must contribute to the costs of their studies. Consequently, governments and their educational quality assurance agencies are demanding that higher education institutions are accountable for the quality of their educational programs, and ﬁgures of student retention are integral to such measures and accountability.

Some commentators have maintained that the widening of participation in higher education and the participation of students from diverse backgrounds has led to a decline in academic standards (Thomas 2002). From this perspective, student dropout is attributed to student deﬁciency and shortcomings in attitude, aptitude, or ability, reﬂected in incorrect program selection, poor work attitudes, and poor approach (Aljahani 2016; Rendon et al. 2004). But as Thomas (2002) states, it is erroneous to connect the wider participation of sections of society to declining standards because of such students’ poor preparation or lack of academic ability. In Tight’s (1998) words, this is victim blaming. Again citing Thomas (2002), in today’s higher education world, the blame for students not succeeding in their studies needs to be shared by the institution.

Student Departure from Study Before Completion

If responsibility for student retention or attrition in their studies is to be shared, institutions need to be aware of the reasons for attrition and address these proactively. While research has provided a range of reasons why students leave, a signiﬁcant ﬁnding is that while it occurs because of both institutional and external factors (Thomas 2002), there is rarely no one motivating factor for departure; in most cases, a combination of interrelated factors is implicated (Crosling et al. 2008a). Along these lines, Tinto’s (2007) model of student retention includes psychological, sociological, organizational, environmental, interaction, and economic platforms that inﬂuence students’ study persistence or departure. More particularly, preemptors for study departure include poor preparation for higher education, a weak match between the student and the institution and/or their study program, leading to an incongruity between the institution’s and student’s values, the student’s lack of study commitment, unsatisfactory academic experience, and social integration. Other reasons include ﬁnancial issues and personal circumstances (Long et al. 2006). Maher and Macallister (2013) state that an insufﬁcient ﬁt between secondary and university education as seen in insufﬁcient preparation for higher education studies is a major contributing factor.

Overriding these matters though, there is evidence that the mismatch between a student’s and the institution’s values is a broad issue, as Bourdieu (1988) pointed out, and concerns cultural capital; the notion is that systems replicate themselves by appealing to and providing a place for those who hold similar values. Thus, cultural capital refers to the capital students hold because they share a world view with the institution based on common experiences and interactions (Braxton and Lien 2000). Importantly, cultural capital, or lack of it, impacts on the suitability of strategies that students bring to bear on their studies. In the earlier times of a more “elite” higher education system, attending students largely came from a section of society where there existed an alignment of values and world view with the institution, minimizing incongruence, maximizing the students’ ability to more readily integrate into the institution and apply academic strategies that are more likely to lead to success (Braxton and Lien 2000; Astin (1993), cited in Aljahani (2016). With the diverse student cohorts of today that include students from a range of socioeconomic and cultural backgrounds, such an alignment cannot be assumed.

For greater alignment, both the institution and the students must share responsibility for adjustment and contribution to better approaches and processes to improve retention and the academic experience for all students, regardless of their backgrounds. However, because the habitus, or culture, of a higher education institution permeates the institution’s organizational approach, the institution has a prime responsibility to accommodate students from diverse backgrounds, to assist their integration. This covers admission and enrollment processes, the institution’s social organization, and the academic subsystem. It thus impacts on the nature and design of curriculum, the role of developmental classes, pedagogic strategies, expected classroom behaviors, types of academic support, studying norms, and the nature of faculty contact. Students experiencing disjuncture with the values and expectations that underpin these approaches may have to compromise their previously held values, and this is part of the educational transformational approach for all students as they undertake their studies. However, if the disjuncture is too great and if students are not supported in this transformation, it can lead to tension and possible withdrawal from study.

Institutional Actions to Improve Student Retention

As student numbers have increased and cohorts have diversiﬁed, institutions have often needed to make transformational shifts to maintain the quality of their educational offerings and outcomes and consequently to improve retention ﬁgures (Schendel and McCowan 2016). The domains requiring shifts are broad and include governance, curriculum development, teaching, learning and classroom approaches, student services and faculty and staff composition, ﬁnancial arrangements and support, and even timetabling of classes (Rendon et al. 2004). For institutions that are focusing on improving student retention, Tinto’s (2007) call for an increased focus on what works emphasizes that practical, effective measures are required, rather than only theoretical viewpoints.

But what is it that works in improving student retention? Institutional efforts can be directed toward providing a bridge between students’ prior experiences and expectations with the aim to assist students’ integration into the institution, which in turn will support their academic success. This is because it is well accepted that if students from diverse groups access higher education, they also need to have the opportunity for academic success (Thomas 2002), and gaining a place is an empty experience if not accompanied by study success. Providing a bridge means appreciating the intellectual, social, and emotional levels of students when they enter the institution and beginning at these levels (Johnson 2000). It should be pointed out, though, that practical adjustments to academic processes and systems do not aim to weaken standards and academic rigor, but to share in responsibility for student success. However, as Aljahani (2016) states, improving student retention is a challenging task.

Researchers have put forward strategies that enhance the possibility of academic success for students from diverse backgrounds. Central to these is the notion that it is important to recognize and acknowledge these students and the diversity that they bring to their studies. According to Stephenson (2016), students from diverse groups need to ﬁnd a safe and welcoming space in the institution, because as Johnson (2000, p. 221) explains, “minority students see campus as alien territory.”

For instance, in relation to students who are ﬁrst in their family to attend higher education, O’Shea (2016) outlines ways that diversity can be used proactively. O’Shea (2016) stresses that the ﬁrst point is to adopt a strength-based approach, recognizing and celebrating what such students bring to their studies rather than deﬁning diverse cohorts in terms of lack or deﬁcit. Again in relation to ﬁrst in their family participants, O’Shea (2016) explains that attending higher education is a triumphant achievement for these students and their families and the stories of students from diverse backgrounds should be included more speciﬁcally in institutional language and discussion. It is also important to “normalize” the presence of students from diverse groups in the institution (O’Shea 2016), and this can be achieved through including in institutional discourse the key role of higher education in today’s world and the need for highly educated national populations which include students from many sectors of society. Most importantly, as O’Shea (2016) suggests, the experiential capital of individuals through their varying prior life experiences needs to be recognized and built into curriculum and program structures.

The need for inclusive educational environments is also recognized by researchers. For example, Stephenson (2016) highlights the signiﬁcant role of student services in ensuring inclusive approaches in areas such as residences, athletic centers, and provisions for less physically abled students. Stephenson (2016) also points out the value of the simple gesture of academic staff correctly pronouncing the names of students from different cultures. Thomas (2002) adds that in relating to students, staff should attempt to reduce academic and social distance so that students feel valued and validated and have conﬁdence to seek guidance when required.

Student diversity should also be acknowledged and drawn on in academic programs, and again, such students need “teachers, tasks and pedagogies that afﬁrm who they are” (Johnson 2000, p. 221). Crosling et al. (2008b) expand on academic strategies that can support students from diverse backgrounds as they adjust to the expectations of higher education and at the same time acknowledge their backgrounds and experiences in the educational program. These strategies can be categorized as the development of student-responsive curriculum and alternative learning, teaching, and assessment approaches, which aim to develop close meshing between the student, the institution, and the academic program.

Some suitable strategies outlined by Crosling et al. (2008b) are restructuring large lectures into smaller, more interactive classes. The focus moves from the teacher to the students as the students are engaged actively in problem-solving activities, often in a teamwork situation with fellow students, applying their subject’s theory to the resolution of issues. These can be seen as small group learning clusters, where the students are responsible to devise solutions to problems, which can be commented on by their peers as well as the teacher. This approach encourages students to be active rather than passive learners, helping them to develop independence in learning whereby they do not rely solely on their teachers as the only source of knowledge.

Increasing the relevance of the curriculum to the students’ previous experiences and future aspirations is another strategy to enmesh students in their study (Crosling et al. 2008b). As well as providing credibility for the experiences of students from diverse groups, the inclusion of differing views in the academic program strengthens understandings and broadens the academic experience for all students. For instance, differing situations and world views can be utilized in class discussion of the subject’s theories, concepts, and issues.

Assessment procedures can be modiﬁed so that students complete small-scale assessment tasks at regular intervals in their subject, providing them with feedback on their level of understanding and achievement. Combined with targeted academic support, students are able to ﬁll the gaps in their understandings and knowledge (Crosling et al. 2008b).

Induction processes are vital for all commencing students in higher education, but especially for students from diverse backgrounds who may have little understanding of academic processes such as the roles of lectures and tutorials and the expected approach to learning which relies less on rote learning and more on understanding of disciplinary theories and principles and application of these to solve problems. The process of making explicit such expectations prepares students to appreciate the learning approach that underpins academic success. Combined with effective induction processes, study skills support should be integrated closely into students’ study, so that issues can be addressed in ways that are relevant to particular disciplines and subjects (Crosling et al. 2008b).

Conclusion

This paper has explored the retention of students in higher education studies. It recognizes that while there are a number of reasons why students leave their studies before completion, an overriding understanding in the ﬁeld is that students’ study persistence is supported if they are integrated into the institution. Integration is an even more pressing issue for students from diverse backgrounds, for whom there may be wide gaps in their understandings and expectations vis-à-vis those of the institution. While the onus is on students to take responsibility for their learning, be committed to their studies, and strive for success, institutions also need to consider ways that they can adjust their educational processes and programs so that students from diverse backgrounds are included and acknowledged. Importantly, the participation in higher education of students with a range of backgrounds and experiences brings to the educational experience a richness in perspectives that can be mobilized for the beneﬁt of all students. That is, institutional transformations to support student diversity and hence student retention enhance the educational experience for all students, regardless of their previous experiences and backgrounds.